# Contextualizing Greatness

NBA analysts and fans alike love the pastime of comparing players of different eras. Most discussions center around whether or to what extent greats of bygone eras would succeed in today's league. Most discussions gloss over whether today's stars would thrive in yesteryear's league, with success as the foregone conclusion. With regard to this latter question, I beg to differ-- most of today's stars would not see the same degree of success in previous decades.

Most comparison discussions love to pull the magic trick of time travel: "If we magically transported such and such team to the past, they would dominate any _seven-game series_ against any squad of that era." And therein lies the conceit: You're hand-waving away the very context in which a seven-game series takes place. _Seven-game series_ (plural) take place after the ends of grueling regular seasons. What advantages do modern players and/or teams enjoy nowadays that alleviate the physical and emotional wear and tear of long seasons? Here are several major ones off the top of my head: Improved team facilities and support personnel, improved training and diet regimens, and improved salaries with which to pursue both of the former. That does not even take into account the social improvements in American society that resulted from the efforts of our predecessors; even though racism still rears its ugly head today, earlier generations of players undoubtedly had it worse.

Lebron James has famously claimed that he invests **$1 million dollars** into his body _annually_; given his career has spanned 18 years (and counting), I believe it. According to run-repeat.com, the average salary in the NBA only broke $1 million around [the 1990-1991 season][rr-avg]. Even if Lebron were the highest-paid player in 1990-1991, he would only be making [$4.25 million (what Patrick Ewing made that year)][hpp-per-season]. In contrast, [Lebron made ~$39 million in the 2020-2021 season][hpp-2021]. Perhaps, given the same priority of "health is wealth," Lebron might still spend $1 million on his body if transported back in time, but 1/4.25 vs 1/39 still hits different. I'm not even sure there was a million dollars worth of treatment and technology worth spending on 30 years ago. I'm decently confident at least his diet and supplements would be different, since the availability of certain foods and products would be scarce, if available at all.

Does the time travel thought experiment allow you to bring along team training and medical staff? What about dietricians, nutritionists, and chefs? These people are certainly the most under-appreciated part of any franchise. Their efforts are crucial to the success of the players; without them, players would be bereft of their talents in the process of rest and recovery between games. Along with degraded diet, degraded treatment would contribute to significant additional wear and tear over the course of just a single season, let alone multiple seasons. Team meals weren't a thing even 20 years ago. Team doctors' purpose was to get players back on the court as soon as possible, not guard their health. Attitudes have changed around the league with regard to players' health.

Continuing on the topic of health: What happens in the event of significant injury? Modern medicine has resurrected the careers of many a player even in the face of catastrophic injuries like torn ligaments. A great example would be Zach Lavine, who tore his ACL but recovered, and is still one of the bounciest dudes in the league. He would never have come back the way he did if he'd played even 20 years ago, much less 30 or 40 years ago, if he returned at all. Not to mention: Many of our stars now return in less than a year's time after such catastrophic injuries! Sports medicine has definitely come a long way.

Tangential thought: If modern teams get to prepare for their trip to the past, how many pairs of modern basketball shoes do they need to take with them for a season's worth of basketball? How about 5 seasons (if the aim is a dynasty)? I rather doubt stars of today could play as well in the Chucks worn by Dr. J and his contemporaries! Even Michael Jordan tore up his feet when he played his last game at MSG, because he wore the same pair of Air Jordans as he wore his first game there. Sneaker technology had advanced so much.

Given the same constraints of teams from any earlier era, modern teams magically taken to the past would not perform as well as they do today. I can't say for certain that they wouldn't still win, but they certainly wouldn't have the same longevity. It's important to note that I'm not diminishing any team from this era-- to the contrary, players and teams today are the products of fierce, decades-long arms races in health and fitness, and they are stronger, faster, and more skilled than ever. My argument is really that, as modern observers of NBA basketball, we should not minimize the achievements of legends who went before; because previous generations overcame significant structural obstacles, current players can take for granted their solutions. Put respect on their names; as wise men have said before, ["We stand on the shoulders of giants."][giants]

[rr-avg]: https://runrepeat.com/salary-analysis-in-the-nba-1991-2019
[hpp-per-season]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highest-paid_NBA_players_by_season#Highest-paid_player_by_season
[hpp-2021]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highest-paid_NBA_players_by_season#2020%E2%80%932021
[giants]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_on_the_shoulders_of_giants
